2023 Q1 Iroha (#65)
hyperledger/tsc: project-reports/2023/2023-Q1-Hyperledger-Iroha.md

---
layout: default
parent: 2023
grand_parent: Project Updates
---

# Project Health

> Currently, the active maintenance of Iroha 1 has stopped, and there are no plans for major releases. There are discussions on making the release for the current RC, but this is undecided because it’ll take more than one team to switch from their everyday tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the active maintenance of Iroha 1 has stopped, and there are no plans for major releases. There are discussions on making releasing the current RC, but this is undecided because it will require more than one team to switch from their everyday tasks to focus on this.
```

Reviewer 2: `on making releasing` : maybe just `on releasing`?

Author: I agree with @outoftardis, even though I am not a native speaker

Reviewer 2: I believe @WRRicht3r just forgot to delete a word there

 
All Iroha 2 developers are now fully onboarded and at maximum productivity.

Some work with the Ursa team is ongoing. Thanks to Arun S M, the Iroha 2 BCE team will start collaborating with the Hyperledger Blockchain Explorer team.

# Questions/Issues for the TSC

None.

# Releases

> Releases past quarter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Past quarter releases:
```

* v2.0.0-pre-rc.9

There will be a release for the current release candidate after February 14th.

# Overall Activity in the Past Quarter

## Iroha v1

Documentation restoration is in progress.

> While DevOps issues temporarily prevent us from fixing it on the default URL, a [forked repository](https://iroha-1-fork.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is used for the Iroha 1 documentation. This information has been announced for the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While DevOps issues temporarily prevent us from fixing it on the default URL, a [forked repository](https://iroha-1-fork.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is available for the Iroha 1 documentation. This information has been announced to the community.
```

## Iroha v2

Outstanding PR count: 13, most of which are new. PRs are completed in about a week and a half.

> To save RAM, the responsibility for storing blocks has been delegated to Kura: it helps by keeping blocks on disk when not in use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To save RAM, the responsibility for storing blocks has been delegated to Kura to keep blocks on disk when they are not in use.
```

Sumeragi has been restructured; faulty peers are now better supported.

> As part of the Sumeragi refactor, a custom actor pattern was removed from the codebase. Iroha development has moved away from asynchronous Rust code due to its unpredictability. Now Iroha uses manual locks, resulting in sleeping idle code and improved performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the Sumeragi refactoring, a custom actor pattern was removed from the codebase. Iroha development has moved away from asynchronous Rust code due to its unpredictability. Now Iroha uses manual locks, resulting in sleeping idle code and improved performance.
```

Soft forks are now being detected and resolved.

> Cofiguration update in progress: whole-chain parameters such as those pertaining to Sumeragi and queue settings as a new type of [ISI](https://hyperledger.github.io/iroha-2-docs/guide/blockchain/instructions.html). Benefits include better semantics and easier sharing through existing consensus mechanisms between peers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Configuration update in progress: whole-chain parameters such as those pertaining to Sumeragi and queue settings as a new type of [ISI](https://hyperledger.github.io/iroha-2-docs/guide/blockchain/instructions.html). Benefits include better semantics and easier sharing through existing consensus mechanisms between peers.
```

> Configuration update in progress: whole-chain parameters such as those pertaining to Sumeragi and queue settings as a new type of [ISI](https://hyperledger.github.io/iroha-2-docs/guide/blockchain/instructions.html). Benefits include better semantics and easier sharing through existing consensus mechanisms between peers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuration update in progress: whole-chain parameters such as those pertaining to Sumeragi and queue settings as a new type of [Iroha Special Instructions (ISI)](https://hyperledger.github.io/iroha-2-docs/guide/blockchain/instructions.html). Benefits include better semantics and easier sharing through existing consensus mechanisms between peers.
```

WASM permission validators ([#2596](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/issues/2596)) are now supported. The support of inbuilt validators will be removed soon, so only the WASM permission token will be used for the definition parameters ([#2689](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/issues/2689)).

> The client-side block streaming mechanism now exists as a proof-of-concept. JS SDK supports it, Java has support in the works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client-side block streaming mechanism now exists as a proof-of-concept. JavaScript SDK already supports it, Java SDK has support in the works.
```

There is now a query that shows the total amount of assets: `FindAssetTotalQuantitiyBeAssetDefinitionId`.

[JSON version 5](https://json5.org/) is now supported.

The syntax for the `genesis.json` has been simplified and improved.

Observing peers are now brought into consensus to validate if the previous consensus fails.

> FFI on the client side is in progress. It will be ready in the next Iroha release and dynamic linkage will be supported soon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FFI on the client side is a work in progress. It will be ready in the next Iroha release and dynamic linkage will be supported soon.
```

> FFI on the client side is in progress. It will be ready in the next Iroha release and dynamic linkage will soon be supported soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FFI on the client side is in progress. It will be ready in the next Iroha release and dynamic linkage will be supported soon.
```

---
layout: default

> parent: 2023

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: 2023 Q1 Hyperledger Iroha
parent: 2023
```
Apologies, I missed the title tag in the template. Needed so it shows up in the table of contents.

grand_parent: Project Updates
---

> # Project Healthf

Reviewer 4: Typo

Author: Thanks, fixed

---
layout: default
title: 2023 Q1 Hyperledger Iroha
parent: 2023
grand_parent: Project Updates
---

# Project Health

Currently, the active maintenance of Iroha 1 has stopped, and there are no plans for major releases. There are discussions on releasing the current RC, but this is undecided because it will require more than one team to switch from their everyday tasks to focus on this.
 
All Iroha 2 developers are now fully onboarded and at maximum productivity.

Some work with the Ursa team is ongoing. Thanks to Arun S M, the Iroha 2 BCE team will start collaborating with the Hyperledger Blockchain Explorer team.

# Questions/Issues for the TSC

None.

# Releases

Past quarter releases:

* v2.0.0-pre-rc.9

> There will be a release for the [`Iroha v2.0.0-pre-rc.13`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3134) at or after February 16th.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The release for the [`Iroha v2.0.0-pre-rc.13`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3134) is planned for February 16th.
```

# Overall Activity in the Past Quarter

> According to the [Iroha Activity Dashboard](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/projects/hyperledger%2Firoha/dashboard;subTab=technical?time=%7B%22from%22:%222022-10-01T07:00:00.000Z%22,%22type%22:%22absolute%22,%22to%22:%222022-12-31T07:00:00.000Z%22%7D) for the fourth quarter of 2022 (October-December), Iroha repo has 143 PRs submitted from 28 contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the [Iroha Activity Dashboard](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/projects/hyperledger%2Firoha/dashboard;subTab=technical?time=%7B%22from%22:%222022-10-01T07:00:00.000Z%22,%22type%22:%22absolute%22,%22to%22:%222022-12-31T07:00:00.000Z%22%7D) for the fourth quarter of 2022 (October-December), the Iroha repo has 143 PRs submitted from 28 contributors.
```

## Iroha v1

Documentation restoration is in progress.

While DevOps issues temporarily prevent us from fixing it on the default URL, a [forked repository](https://iroha-1-fork.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is available for the Iroha 1 documentation. This information has been announced to the community.

## Iroha v2

> Outstanding PR count: 13, most of which are new. PRs are completed in about a week and a half.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Outstanding PR count: 13, most of which are new. PRs are reviewed and merged in about a week and a half.
```

The client-side block streaming mechanism now exists as a proof-of-concept. JavaScript SDK already supports it, Java SDK has support in the works.

There is now a query that shows the total amount of assets: `FindAssetTotalQuantitiyBeAssetDefinitionId`.

[JSON version 5](https://json5.org/) is now supported.

The syntax for the `genesis.json` has been simplified and improved.

Observing peers are now brought into consensus to validate if the previous consensus fails.

FFI on the client side is a work in progress. It will be ready in the next Iroha release and dynamic linkage will be supported soon.

# Maintainer Diversity

Currently, the Iroha 2 core development team consists of:

* 8 Rust developers + 1 tech lead
* 1 front-end developer
* 2 full-time QA engineers (functional and load testing/benchmarking)
* 1 full-time technical writer
* 1 full-time DevOps
* 1 community manager who also handles front-end, back-end, DevOps and writing tasks as needed

> The maintainer team now consists of the Soramitsu employees. Gregorz Bazior (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The maintenance team now consists of the Soramitsu employees. Gregorz Bazior (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1.
```
